---
layout: default
---

##Notes on The Elements of Style by Strunk & White

_warning: blatant hypocrisy ahead_

Introduction
The introduction, written by E.B. White, is a compelling background on White’s university professor Will Strunk and his little book of rules that make a case for “cleanliness, accuracy, and brevity in the use of English”.
Strunk’s rules are rigid, uncompromising orders, many of which are focused on conciseness. Despite the book’s simplicity and short length, it is highly applicable to writers of all levels, and its compactness only strengthens the propounded principles.

I. Elementary Rules of Usage

For conciseness, I’ve chosen to omit a few rules, in this chapter and in the succeeding chapters, that I found uninteresting or obvious. This change, partially inspired by Strunk’s cry to “omit needless words”, takes place later in the bulleted lists.

Rule 1: Form the possessive singular of nouns by adding ‘s. No matter what letter the singular noun ends with, if a writer is forming a possessive version of that noun, simply add ‘s.
Rule 2: In a series of three or more terms with a single conjunction, use a comma after each term except for the last. The last such comma in a list is often known as a serial comma or an Oxford comma. So far, these rules are pretty basic guidelines of grammar.
Rule 3: Enclose parenthetic expressions between commas. Strunk defines a parenthetic expression as one that interrupts the flow of a sentence. I also noticed that such expressions tend to modify the initial item in the list by providing more information. The author, with the help of a series of examples, backed up my intuitive knowledge by defining these modifiers as “nonrestrictive relative clauses”. In contrast, restrictive clauses (those that do not significantly interrupt the flow of a sentence), while more difficult to identify, do not require commas. I find it interesting that many principles of grammar are already known in practice, yet might not be immediately identified in theory. Just looking back at the paragraph I wrote, there are many examples of nonrestrictive relative clauses in particular.
Rule 4: Place a comma before a conjunction introducing an independent clause. Rule four is self-explanatory— without this comma, a sentence with two independent clauses is long and hard to read. 
Rule 5: Do not join independent clauses with a comma. This rule is interesting because of the sheer volume of people who defy it on a daily basis. That is not to say that I do not violate it from time to time as well— in fact, any given essay of mine is bound to blatantly disregard an excessive number of Strunk’s rules (in most cases, those concerned with brevity). The exception to the rule also intrigued me as I’ve never heard of it before. While the sentences given as examples (e.g. “here today, gone tomorrow”) made sense to me intuitively, they didn’t really make sense grammatically. 
This discrepancy caused me to question whether the exception had simply grown organically from the fact that writers tend to disregard the need for a semicolon in shorter or simpler phrases, or if it was a legitimate rule. Since there isn’t really a way to prove legitimacy in grammar if all examples agree with the rules and are accepted in practice, I suppose that either a comma or a semicolon would be viable for more conversational phrases.
Rule 8: Use a dash to set off an abrupt break or interruption and to announce a long appositive (modifier) or summary. This rule was interesting to me because I hadn’t really considered the use of em dashes in a grammatical sense rather than a stylistic choice. The author’s first example of this: “His first thought on getting out of bed — if he had any thought at all — was to get back in again”. This sentence reminds me of rule three: “Enclose parenthetic expressions between commas”. What is the difference between the above example and a similar one from rule three? Both options seem to be plausible, but the em dash indicates a larger interruption than a comma would. The dash also separates the middle (or latter) clause a bit more than a comma would. I think in this case, it depends on the intention of the writer.
Rule 10: Use the proper case of pronoun. This rule was confusing to me because of all the examples, which is why I included it. I think the main idea here is that the pronouns used to refer to a person in a sentence changes based on where they are in the sentence: whether they are the subject or object of the sentence.
Rule 11: A participial phrase at the beginning of a sentence must refer to the grammatical subject. This rule, unlike many of the others, is more difficult to detect in practice than in theory. It involves both correctly identifying the subject of a sentence and structuring the sentence around that subject so that the verb or participial phrase (a phrase that looks like a verb but functions as an adjective) will refer to the correct implied person.

II. Elementary Principles of Composition
Rule 12: Choose a suitable [structural] design and hold to it. I like Strunk’s last sentence on this subject: “The more clearly the writer perceives the shape, the better are the chances of success”. A general structural frame should reflect the purpose of a work, and without one, there is no chance of meaningful and effective organization of ideas on a smaller scale.
Rule 13: Make the paragraph the unit of composition. Division of topics into paragraphs, for the modern writer, is a common practice of composition. However, Strunk’s inclusion of this rule (and of a long explanation justifying it) implies that this procedure might have been less prevalent in his time.
Rule 14: Use the active voice. Although this rule has shown up in every English or literature class I’ve been in, it is an important reminder to know the positive effects of following it. The active voice is more direct, vigorous, and engaging than its passive counterpart.
Rule 15: Put statements in positive form. Similarly to rule fourteen, this recommendation is rather widespread, but it is one that I frequently overlook.
Rule 16: Use definite, specific, concrete language. Such language helps a writer to evoke certain desired emotions or pictures for his readers by creating a strong and unambiguous image. Specific language is also much more interesting to read than vague statements due to its inherent novelty.
Rule 17: Omit needless words.  Ah yes, the iconic plea. Strunk proclaims that “vigorous writing is concise”, and lists common expressions that violate his seventeenth rule. Vigorous, forceful writing cannot contain extra words that might tone down tensions or distract the reader from the writer’s main points.
Rule 19: Express coordinate ideas in similar form. For parallel construction to be effective, the two expressions should be similar in content and function. Furthermore, both elements of correlative expressions such as: “A time not for words but for action” should be similarly constructed. 
Rule 20: Keep related words together. To make for easier reading and processing of the information in a sentence, don’t insert words without completing a logical series of words that belong together. An example of a writer disregarding this rule: “You can call your mother in London and tell her all about George’s taking you out to dinner for just two dollars”. The sentence is wordy and badly ordered.
Rule 22: Place the emphatic words of a sentence at the end. Both the beginning and the end of every sentence are positions of logical prominence and therefore receive special emphasis.

III. A Few Matters of Form

Note: Chapters three and four are in a different format than the numbered listings and explanations of chapters one and two.

Colloquialisms: If you use a slang word or phrase, simply use it; do not draw attention to it by enclosing it in quotation marks. To do so is to put on airs, as though you were inviting the reader to join you in a select society of those who know better. I found it very surprising that the author could perfectly explain the reasoning behind an occurrence which I would have thought to be associated with 21st century writing. He essentially argues to simply use words as they are without additional notation that shows the author’s perspective on a word.
Exclamations: Do not attempt to emphasize simple statements by using a mark of exclamation. The exclamation mark is to be reserved for use after true exclamations or commands. Here again, the author advocates for the usage of raw words without any attachments that might bring connotations or opinions.
After this, the author describes his procedures for formatting headings, margins, sentences in parentheses, scholarly references, syllabication, and titling. I am quite familiar with these instructions as they match the general formatting guidelines that we currently use.

IV. Words and Expressions Commonly Misused

In chapter four, the author provides an extensive list of commonly confused words in the English language: examples of bad style and careless writing. He reminds us that language is not rigid and has no set rules for us to turn to in questions of correct usage. Because of this, when correcting such errors as the ones listed below, we cannot simply switch a word or a group of words with their accurate wordings. Instead, we must replace “vague generality by definite statement”. Preciseness and specificity are of utmost importance. 

On a slightly unrelated note, this chapter in particular (along with several other other parts of this book) reminds me of an essay written by George Orwell: Politics and the English Language. Orwell writes of the decline of language, being caused in part by the abuse and misuse of words. He argues that by using words in a vague manner without preciseness and detail, the words themselves have several different possible meanings, and consequently become meaningless. Modern writing, according to Orwell, is also slowly becoming corrupted as writers string together useless words with increasing indifference to their specific meanings— in an attempt to sound sophisticated while taking the easy way out. Like Strunk and White, Orwell introduces a very short list of rules that emphasize simplicity and brevity— a proposed cure for the decadence of the English language and for the consequential corruption of thought.

I’ve listed a few of the misused expressions that stood out to me below. I myself have used all of the below words and expressions incorrectly at least once. In fact, I’ve abused nearly all of the words in the list from the book in the same ways that Strunk & White warn against. However, I found it interesting that the author warned against specific “improper” usages of words and also claimed at the start of the chapter that there are no “correct” and “rigid” rules of language that exist. While some of his usage rules (particularly those comparing two words with different definitions) are valid, he seems to contradict himself a bit. Although this chapter can be helpful for a certain period of time in which language has not significantly evolved from when the book was published, I think that it could be safely omitted or at least shortened. The importance of keeping language from degradation and increasing vagueness does not lie in the small errors but in the overall rules for usage (which are described in the other chapters). 

Aggravate. Irritate. The first means “to add to” an already troublesome or vexing matter or condition. The second means “to vex” or “to annoy” or “to chafe”. Although I am aware of these definitions, I often find myself using either of these words interchangeably to mean “to vex” or “to annoy”.
All right. Idiomatic in familiar speech as a detached phrase in the sense “Agreed” or “Go ahead”, or “O.K.” Properly written as two words. I actually wasn’t aware that “all right” was considered the correct rendering of “alright”.
Alternate. Alternative. The words are not always interchangeable… The first means every other one in a series; the second, one of two possibilities. An alternate may stand for “a substitute”, but an alternative, although used in a similar sense, connotes a matter of choice that is never present with “alternate”. This is one of the more confusing comparisons in the list.
Case. Often unnecessary. “In many cases, the rooms lacked air conditioning” can be simplified to: “Many of the rooms lacked air conditioning”.
Claim. (verb). With object-noun, this means to “lay claim to”. Correct usage: “She claimed to be the sole heir”. Incorrect usage: “He claimed he knew how”.
Currently. In the sense of now with a verb in the present tense, “currently” is usually redundant. This recommendation might sometimes be taken a step further by eliminating the word altogether.

V. An Approach to Style (With a List of Reminders)

At the start of chapter five, the author gives a long explanation of what a writer’s personal style entails, stepping out from the rigid rules of chapter one into more gentle reminders and suggestions to help the reader “find the way to a satisfactory style”. 

Rule 1: Place yourself in the background. Write in a way that draws the reader’s attention to the sense and substance of the writing, rather than to the mood and temper of the author. If the writing is solid and good, the mood and temper of the writer will eventually be revealed and not at the expense of the work. Here, we start to see a theme of subtlety in the author’s suggestions. He warns against directly drawing a reader’s attention towards the writer, and advancing the idea that good writing will capture the reader with its substance and consequently reveal the writer through his own work.
Rule 5: Revise and rewrite. Few writers are so expert that they can produce what they are after on the first try. Flaws in arrangement call for transpositions, and after a draft is written, there is always room for more experimentation.
Rule 6: Do not overwrite. I especially struggle with following this suggestion. A written work is meant to be best enjoyed when and as it is read, and not as it is typed. When a writer allows himself to keep sections long and overwhelming prose in his work, he does so at the expense of his readers. 
Rule 7: Do not overstate. When you overstate, readers will be instantly on guard, and everything that has preceded your overstatement as well as everything that follows it will be suspect in their minds because they have lost confidence in your judgement or your poise. This explanation is a fantastic description of a concept that I’ve often kept in mind while writing but never articulated. Once the measure of something is expressed, be it slightly overexaggerated or not, the reader might feel obliged to a description of the measures as to which the writer’s following statements hold true. This traps the writer in an ongoing cycle of stating and overstating.
Rule 8: Avoid the use of Qualifiers. An explanation for this rule can be found in my above sentiments from rule seven; a single qualifier or statement, however accurate, can quickly turn into a series of overstatements that take the focus off of the words whose meanings are being modified in their respective sentences.
Rule 11: Do not explain too much. Along with overwriting and a general lack of clarity, I often find myself overexplaining for fear that the reader might misunderstand my intentions.
Rule 18: Use figures of speech sparingly. Too many similes can be distracting, and metaphors can become confusing.



[back](./)
